---
title: Us vs. Them (Nazism, Bolshevism, Scientology)
---

In his 1925 autobiography *Mein Kampf*, Adolf Hitler spoke of the Aryan as

> ...the Prometheus of mankind, from whose shining brow the divine spark of genius has at all times flashed forth, always kindling anew that fire which, in the form of knowledge, illuminated the dark night by drawing aside the veil of mystery and thus showing man how to rise and become master over all the other beings on the earth. Should he be forced to disappear, a profound darkness will descend on the earth; within a few thousand years human culture will vanish and the world will become a desert.

<!--more-->To Hitler, the Aryan race was the creator of the highest forms of civilization, and every other race had acquired its culture only through being conquered and influenced by the Aryans. And not only were they a superhuman master race that had originated all that was valuable in human culture, they were also the bearers of the highest morality, the only truly selfless and peaceful race on earth.

The Jews, in contrast, were destroyers of civilization, an immoral, selfish and parasitic race that had no creative or life-sustaining power of their own, that exploited other races for their own benefit and thereby eventually caused their degradation and downfall. Hitler [had once compared the Aryan and the Jew](https://carolynyeager.net/why-we-are-antisemites-text-adolf-hitlers-1920-speech-hofbr%C3%A4uhaus) thus:

> Thus we can see the two great differences between races: Aryanism means ethical perception of work and that which we today so often hear – socialism, community spirit, common good before own good. Jewry means egoistic attitude to work and thereby mammonism and materialism, the opposite of socialism. And due to these traits, which he cannot ‘overstep’ as they are in his blood and, as he himself admits, in these traits alone lays the necessity for the Jew to behave unconditionally as a destroyer of states.

What is often referred to as "us-vs-them thinking" is evident in these passages. This kind of thinking is commonly held to be a feature of extremist ideologies and blamed for tribal conflict. The world is seen as divided into an 'us' and a 'them' with the two groups at war with each other, with Us as Good and Them as Evil. But what's not obvious from this description - or at least, wasn't obvious to me - is that us-vs-them thinking is profoundly asymmetric, and that this is what ultimately makes it so dangerous.

Two teams competing against each other in a sports tournament - for example - usually do not engage us-vs-them thinking in the way that Hitler did. They tend to view the 'us' and the 'them' as similar, are capable of admiring players on the other team, and can walk up to each other and shake hands after the game. Two nations at war, however, will see each other as devils and themselves as saints. Their incompatible and opposed moral qualities - in their minds - are the very reason for the conflict. *We* are simply trying to do good in the world and help others, or go about our lives in peace, but *They* hate our goodness and want to destroy it and replace it with evil - and that's why we fight.

In the groups I discuss here, there are further interesting patterns in the way that good and evil are constructed. Good is identified with altruism and cooperation, evil with selfishness and a constitutional inability to cooperate with others. *We* are heroes who are loyal to our community to the extent of giving our lives for it, *They* are cowards who betray each other for petty interests and so cannot even form a real community. *Our* community is a special and exalted one, founded on uncompromising moral principles, on honour and duty and love for our fellow man - *their* alliance is an unholy one that goes against their own claimed principles, founded only on lies and deception and short-term interest.

These exact patterns can be seen in the rhetoric of Stalin, who [had this to say of Bolsheviks](https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/stalin/works/1924/01/30.htm):

> Comrades, we Communists are people of a special mould. We are made of a special stuff. We are those who form the army of the great proletarian strategist, the army of Comrade Lenin. There is nothing higher than the honour of belonging to this army. There is nothing higher than the title of member of the Party whose founder and leader was Comrade Lenin. It is not given to everyone to be a member of such a party. It is the sons of the working class, the sons of want and struggle, the sons of incredible privation and heroic effort who before all should be members of such a party.

and [of "Trotskyists", whom he opposed to "Leninists"](https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/stalin/works/1924/11_19.htm):

> Trotskyism is distrust of the Bolshevik Party principle, of the monolithic character of the Party, of its hostility towards opportunist elements. In the sphere of organisation, Trotskyism is the theory that revolutionaries and opportunists can co-exist and form groups and coteries within a single party. You are, no doubt, familiar with the history of Trotsky's August bloc, in which the Martovites and Otzovists, the Liquidators and Trotskyites, happily co-operated, pretending that they were a "real" party. It is well known that this patchwork "party" pursued the aim of destroying the Bolshevik Party.

Stalin's argument was that the cooperation of Trotskyists was not "real" cooperation - they were an admixture of different, conflicting interests who "pretended" they were a united group for the sole purpose of destroying the Party. The very same argument was made by Hitler about the Jews:

> It is similar with the Jew. His sense of sacrifice is only apparent. It exists only as long as the existence of the individual makes it absolutely necessary. However, as soon as the common enemy is conquered, the danger threatening all averted and the booty hidden, the apparent harmony of the Jews among themselves ceases, again making way for their old causal tendencies. The Jew is only united when a common danger forces him to be or a common booty entices him; if these two grounds are lacking, the qualities of the crassest egoism come into their own, and in the twinkling of an eye the united people turns into a horde of rats, fighting bloodily among themselves.

The advantage of redefining Good and Evil as Those-Who-Cooperate and Those-Who-Do-Not-Cooperate is that it creates a clear rationale for purging the group of dissenters. If goodness means cooperation, then dissent must be evil - and since *we* are good and *they* are evil, the dissenter must be one of *them* who has somehow managed to infiltrate *our* group. If the dissenter seems to be nothing like Them and instead seems exactly like one of Us, this simply shows how dangerously deceptive the enemy is.

The enemy is thus constructed in the following way:

There is a type of person who is constitutionally incapable of cooperation and tries to destroy and undermine everything good, strong and valuable. This type is the source of all evil and must be purged from society if we are to survive and not be destroyed by it. Since our movement is for good things, this type attempts to undermine it. Our movement must therefore ruthlessly suppress this type.

This type is also deceptive and that is the most evil thing about them. They pretend to be your friend and then stab you in the back. That is why we are not the godlike beings we would otherwise be, that is why our movement is failing to deliver what it promised - because this type has infiltrated our group and is trying to undermine it from within.

In Scientology, this internal-external enemy is called the Suppressive Person (SP) or the Anti-Social Personality. The Scientology website [explains the motivations of SPs](https://www.scientology.in/faq/scientology-attitudes-and-practices/what-is-a-suppressive-person.html) as follows:

> The basic reason the Suppressive Person behaves as he or she does lies in a hidden terror of others. To such a person every other being is an enemy, an enemy to be covertly or overtly destroyed. The fixation is that survival itself depends on “keeping others down” or “keeping people ignorant.” If anyone were to promise to make others stronger or brighter, the Suppressive Person would suffer the utmost agony.
>
> Because of this, the Suppressive Person seeks to upset, continuously undermine, spread bad news about and denigrate betterment activities and groups. Thus the Anti-Social Personality is also against what Scientology is about—helping people become more able and improving conditions in society.

Once again, SPs are constructed as being unable to cooperate because they see everyone else as an enemy and hate and fear their strength. In contrast, Scientology is all about cooperation and helping and uplifting others - which sets up the basic conflict between the SP and Scientology, where of course the SP is always the aggressor and Scientology is always attacked for trying to improve the condition of humanity.

What is especially fascinating about the description on the Scientology website is that it lays out the entire psychology of demonizing dissent in a few short paragraphs. The website goes on to say:

> As anyone can think of many examples of a Suppressive Person, this concept is not limited to Scientology. However, when such a person is connected to Scientology, for the good of the Church and the individuals in it, such a person is officially labeled a Suppressive Person so that others will know not to associate with them.

So far, an SP is simply a terrible person whom everyone - Scientologist or non-Scientologist - would do well to avoid. But now in the very next paragraph, it's made clear that *anyone who criticizes or dissents from Scientology* will be declared an SP.

> To be declared a Suppressive Person is extremely rare and results in expulsion from the Scientology religion. This occurs in instances of serious offenses against the Scientology faith and can also occur when an individual is found to be actively working to suppress the well-being of others. This can be done through criminal acts already recognized by society as unlawful or through the commitment of acts deemed Suppressive Acts in the Scientology Justice Codes—which includes the Suppressive Act of publicly renouncing the faith, an act which in Scientology, as well as almost every religion, is grounds for automatic expulsion.

Each step of the argument seems logical: of course there are some people who are just generally terrible, of course other people should be warned not to associate with them, of course apostasy will get you expelled from any religion and Scientology isn't being unreasonable here - but when you add it up, what it's actually saying is that publicly renouncing Scientology puts you in the same moral category as Hitler.

Speaking of Hitler, he too claimed that "Jewry" had to be expunged from the nation if it was to survive:

> If we wish to make these social reforms, this must go hand in hand with the fight against the enemy of every social institution: Jewry... And in this action we will remain adamant, which means: removal of Jews from amongst our people, not because we begrudge them their existence – we congratulate the rest of the world on account of their visits – but because we value the existence of our own people a thousand times higher than that of an alien race.

Back in the Soviet Union, Stalin ended his diatribe against Trotskyism by declaring:

> You will ask: what is to be done now? What are the Party's immediate tasks in connection with Trotsky's new literary pronouncements?
>
> Trotskyism is taking action now in order to discredit Bolshevism and to undermine its foundations. It is the duty of the Party *to bury Trotskyism as an ideological trend*.

A decade later, beginning in 1936, he purged "Trotskyists" from the Party and had them arrested and executed.

Us-vs-them thinking claims to divide the world neatly into two groups, but it does not in fact end up doing that. The enemy is always an internal-external enemy, existing as traitors among Us and aggressors among Them. The definition of an external enemy is thus often less about fighting an actual external enemy and more about purging those within the group who are deemed insufficiently loyal to the leader or the cause. It's about branding Those-Who-Do-Not-Cooperate as existential threats who must be eliminated in order to save the group.

This is done by portraying them as being against morality and society itself, as people who are selfish to the core, who attack anyone who opposes their evil deeds, who have no scruples about deceiving or exploiting others, who are incapable of truly bonding even with each other. They are criminal by nature and we must treat them the same way we treat those who are criminal by their deeds: we must ostracize them and banish them from our community forever.