---
title: i miss the left.
---

I've been thinking lately about how I relate to politics after the upheavals of the last decade or so. Somewhere around the mid-2010s, it seems like everything was forced into a crude left-right binary and has since been spiralling around in a whirlpool inside it. And it isn't even a left-right binary so much as an anti-right-wing-populist-leader/anti-liberal-anti-Muslim binary. But it was presented as a left-right binary, and everyone treated it as a left-right binary (despite barely knowing what that even meant), because I guess that felt simpler.<!--more-->

Meanwhile, all of left-wing and liberal discourse (and even part of conservative discourse) was taken over by a cultish social-media-spawned version of feminism that tried to hybridize itself with every other social justice movement using mostly undigested Marxist ideas, starting out as a genuine desire to build solidarity between different groups but quickly turning into an attempt to one-up everyone else in terms of legitimacy. Talk of "privilege" and "oppression", "mansplaining" and "white tears" saturated the internet and media and soon even everyday conversation.

I never really took to this discourse, though I suppose I tried a few times. There were too many glaring problems with its ideas (ironic, given how its favourite term of condemnation was "problematic") - but even more than that, the tone was too narcissistic and self-righteous and puritanical for me to be anything but repelled by it. Meghan Daum described it in [an excellent Medium piece](https://gen.medium.com/nuance-a-love-story-ae6a14991059) like this:

> ...I was suddenly consumed by the political activism of a very vocal minority of younger people, mostly millennials. The values of this minority were more or less in sync with my own. Still, there was something about the tone in which they espoused them, their very inflection, that made me feel like I was simultaneously being sent to my room by my mother and banned from a lunch table by the mean girls.

That last part is true, about the mean girls. What I remember about the feminism I loved and was inspired by in my late teens and early twenties (though again, I'm not even sure if it really existed) was that it didn't seem dogmatic or exclusive. It was busy discovering fascinating things about gender and human nature, and deeply annoyed that it wasn't taken seriously by the wider world. It had, at least for me, contained a commitment to the values of freethought and liberty and equality that had attracted me to the left in the first place.

There used to be all these silly YouTube videos where people went around asking random strangers if they believed in gender equality, and if they said yes, they'd say "okay, then you're a feminist". At the time, I saw this as an annoying dilution of feminism to pander to the status quo - and I didn't like the insistence on "converting" everyone into feminism, it reminded me of the way the Hindu right tried to "convert" everyone into Hindu nationalism by claiming that everyone was a Hindu by default.

But now that kind of inclusiveness is unthinkable. Feminism - and I keep talking about feminism though this is also about the wider left, because feminism illustrates the problems so well - has become profoundly exclusionary. Ten years ago, being a feminist wasn't cool - so it couldn't exclude anyone anyway. Then it suddenly became normalized and cool, and everyone and their cousin started calling themselves a feminist, and so the badge of True Feminism became a rare and coveted commodity, and people started fighting over it - and then we ended up here.

And I *hate* this. I feel like I don't relate to feminist or left-wing discourse at all anymore, because they've all become such sellouts. They've literally sold their politics for clicks and eyeballs and social media affirmation. It's gotten to the point where I can barely endure the company of most people I meet, because they're likely to say something swearing fealty to woke feminism, or to put me through some kind of purity test to judge whether I know the right words and perform the correct political values.

If that was what I wanted, I could have gotten it in spades from the conservative right. Didn't need to come all the way over here for that.

This new feminism feels to me just like New Age spirituality. Where earlier feminism was anti-essentialist and humanist, this one insists on identity essentialism, not unlike how spiritual people insist on some kind of vague "Consciousness" as the essence of all beings. It invents meaningless pseudoscientific terms (like gender categories) the same way the New Age people do, and insists that all human experience can be expressed in those terms. It is rabidly opposed to art and literature and philosophy and critical thinking and humor, just like every cult is. It expects you to read certain approved texts, and nothing else, on pain of excommunication. It lives in a paranoid fantasy world, seeing conspiracies everywhere, convinced that all criticism is a personal attack. It talks incessantly about how abusive and oppressive the world is, but somehow fails to notice that it is itself the best example of the thing it's criticizing.

Just like with New Age spirituality, there are a lot of empathetic, intelligent people who relate to its stated values, and believe in it because of that. In small doses, its ideas are actually quite helpful and worth seriously engaging with. But the soul-sucking emptiness at the heart of its worldview is not visible from the outside. It's only visible to those who've been on the inside, and experienced what it can do to them.

This is a feminism that deals in taboo and blasphemy, dangerous weapons in even the most reliable hands. It places its own feelings at the centre, and then you have to walk on eggshells around it. If you don't, you're a traitor, heretic, demon. Just as women who didn't conform to patriarchal norms were historically (and in some parts of the world, still are) suspected of being witches, branded as witches, burnt as witches, now people who don't conform to this New-Age-cult feminism are the objects of the same suspicion and targeting.

I miss the old feminism, and the old left. The kind that was intertwined with philosophy and art and science and real, genuine politics, inextricable from humanism, and from the humanities. Maybe it never existed, maybe I only dreamed it. But the shattering of a dream does not diminish in impact because it was only a dream.

I'm still looking for it, because I believe it does exist, or can exist, or will exist again. But I don't know which way to go to find it, because last decade's maps are no longer any good.