---
title: Unnecessary-Variable Thinking
---

There's a [clip of an old debate](https://youtu.be/hU6TkfCGlX8?t=453) between Sam Harris, Michael Shermer and Deepak Chopra in which Harris says to Chopra

>...what you do, and what many people who invoke spooky physics do, in the service of propping up their religious and New Age intuitions... they think that because quantum mechanics is spooky and difficult to understand, and because what you're saying is spooky and difficult to understand, they must somehow be related, or they must somehow be mutually supportive, and that's fundamentally not true.

I recently realized I've been observing a pattern connected with this for a long time, and trying to root it out of my own thought processes is almost a fundamental part of the way I think. <!--more-->I had described it in a college term paper I once wrote as "unnecessary variables" - if you don't like what your theory is saying and want to make it say something else, or to restrict its application in a particular area, you do that by sneaking in an extra variable. You then put whatever you want into that variable, and claim that the theory "doesn't explain" that variable (and so it's fatally flawed, or can't be considered applicable to... etc.)

(The extra variable, in this case, is "quantum" or "consciousness" or "quantum consciousness".)

I think I had an analogy with systems of linear equations in mind - you can't find a unique solution if the system has more variables than equations, you'll end up with infinite solutions or no solution. Adding the "unnecessary variable" to the theory is like that. You don't like the unique solution, so you decide to get another, but you can only get it out of those equations if you throw in another variable. You make it sound like you're adding something new and sophisticated, like you're extending your system to a higher-dimensional space, but really you're just taking parts of existing concepts and combining them into a new one and pretending that new one is somehow different, you're adding a vector that's just a linear combination of the vectors you've already got, and now your columns are linearly dependent.

In the most common forms of unnecessary-variable thinking (at least, the ones I've noticed), the extra variable has something to do with inner experience. "Consciousness", "mind", "soul", "the self", "the unconscious", "God", "love", spirituality", "free will", anything magical, supernatural or paranormal, and lately even "gender" - if you can complete the phrase "but science can't explain..." with it, chances are good you've found an unnecessary variable. And that makes sense - our experiences and feelings are the sacred possessions we most desperately want to protect from the ravages of reason. We feel that there's something more, and we feel that our feelings mean something real, and so whenever we find something mysterious in the world, we turn it into dream-fodder and hope that here, at last, is a portal to a universe where all we've ever felt is true and important. That here, at last, our deeply-felt knowledge of who we are will no longer be ridiculed as myth, superstition, folly, or insanity.

Not thinking this way is tremendously difficult. Anyone who pretends it's easy or shows contempt for people who can't do it perfectly is lying - or, more likely, has simply hidden their feelings in a different unnecessary variable. If you roll your eyes at people who believe in heaven and hell but you believe in socialist utopia, or if you're annoyed by talk of "souls" but you believe in "gender" as some kind of non-physical essence of a person (or vice versa), that's what you're doing. If you laugh at people who read *The Secret* and go on about the "Law of Attraction" but you also believe that the power of reason can achieve unlimited wonders (*cough* guilty *cough*), that's what you're doing.

Even after realizing all this, it took me years to develop a fully physicalist worldview - one that contained no concepts that contradicted the known laws of the universe. The sneakiest of the unnecessary variables was "free will" - it was *really* hard to accept, on an intuitive level, that I was part of a deterministic universe. And even after I had accepted that, I had to go through it all over again with *biological* determinism - it was even harder to accept that I was a product of natural selection, and the temptation to hide away everything I wanted to believe about myself in "free will" was *very* strong. And so I understand why people need unnecessary variables, and I don't blame them for using them to express truths that are important to them.

But the flip side of being able to express your feelings in this way is that... you can also express your most unsavoury feelings. This is where the variables become dangerous. You're not used to criticizing them because you're putting all your energy into defending them, isolating them, protecting them from mockery and debunking. You insist that the variables are infinitely mysterious, that they *cannot* be understood, because if they were understood... they might be debunked. You've rolled up all your feelings and beliefs, valid and invalid, good and bad, into a giant tangled ball and stuffed them into the variable. But now if someone else, someone critical, gets their hands on the variable, they'll take all of it away from you. So you defend the whole thing, the good and the evil, the sublime and the ridiculous, because they're tangled up like earphones that have been in your pocket your entire life, and you can't even tell which is which anymore.

The way to deal with unnecessary variables - and our need for them - isn't to sprinkle them liberally into our worldviews and then declare them sacred and refuse to examine them. It's to use them imaginatively, as artists and storytellers do, as the props that allow us to play the parts we were born to play. They are not "real", but what we do with them is. And for that reason, they are not, and should not be treated as, unknowable, mysterious, or immune from criticism.

(Evidently I abandoned the linear equations analogy a while ago.)