---
title: Unnecessary Variables and Eliminativism
---

I remembered the other day that what I called "unnecessary variables" in [another post]({{site.baseurl}}{%post_url 2020-05-11-unnecessary-variable %}) had a name (kind of) in philosophy. (Incidentally, it's a name that also suggests my linear equations analogy.) [Eliminative materialism](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/materialism-eliminative/) holds that the concepts of folk psychology that we use to talk about our experiences - like "beliefs" and "desires" - are radically wrong as a model or theory of those experiences, and that progress in neuroscience will eventually enable us to eliminate these terms from our vocabulary, and instead talk only about neural events.

<!--more-->

That sounds like an awful world, in which we'd have to talk about "the amygdala" instead of "fear" or "anger", "dopamine" instead of "happiness", and "the hippocampus" instead of "memory". But it might have benefits in terms of clarifying - to ourselves, and others who speak this language - what's actually going on with us. (Disclosure: I've tried to do this, and it did not work out well. I did see some of the aforesaid benefits, though.) The main obstacle I see to this actually happening is that we don't have introspective access to information about what neural events are taking place in our heads - so we'd essentially just be guessing, which would not be substantially different from how we use folk psychology.

Anyway, leaving aside whether eliminating folk psychological concepts from our vocabulary is possible, I think there's definitely a sense in which we can eliminate them from our theories of how we function. I talk about beliefs all the time, but I don't believe in them at all. We tend to think of beliefs as propositions to whose truth we're committed in some way - but when we examine our beliefs, very often it turns out that we have beliefs we didn't even know we had, or we can't quite tell whether we believe in them or not, or we feel like we believe in something but we can't quite define what it is. We can believe our own lies, and we can refuse to believe what we know to be true, and we can suspend disbelief in what we know to be fictional. And there doesn't seem to be any way in which the model of "being committed to the truth of a proposition" can capture all this complexity.

I think of "belief" more as a tendency to cognitively accept a certain model of the world, with no sharp delineation between *pretending* or *suspending disbelief* and actual *belief*. It's also possible to partially or imperfectly accept a model, to be unaware of its underlying assumptions, to only sometimes act according to it, and to simultaneously accept multiple contrasting models (and mix them up or switch between them). It doesn't involve any kind of "truth" at all, just the *feeling* of truth, which is really the feeling of accepting the model. In this sense, illusion is a form of belief too, or maybe all belief is illusion.

Not believing in belief means I'm *eliminating* it from my theory of experience, rather like how I'd eliminate a variable from an equation using another equation. In a broader sense, this seems to be how all eliminativism works. The reason why I don't believe in the supernatural isn't that I've personally investigated every claim of ghosts, fairies, demons and divinities, but that the physical theory of the universe that I believe in *doesn't leave room for such things*. The laws of nature, as articulated by physics, cover everything that could conceivably happen, and so any "supernatural" phenomenon is *by definition* impossible. If the phenomenon is beyond or outside the known laws of nature, then physics as it exists is radically wrong. If physics is not radically wrong, then phenomena that break its laws don't exist.

And it's the same sort of reasoning at the level of the mind. Mental phenomena cannot break the laws of neuroscience, because in doing so, they would be breaking the laws of biology, chemistry... all the way down to physics. The concept of [*supervenience*](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/supervenience/) describes this idea: a difference at the level of mental events implies a difference at the level of neural events, which implies a difference at the level of physical events. (To drag in another math analogy, there's a surjective mapping from neural events to mental events. This mapping is what we're talking about when we refer to the "neural correlates" of mental events or states.) There are technically ways in which non-neural physical events, like external electromagnetic stimulation, can affect mental states, but I don't think this counts as "breaking" the laws of neuroscience. It doesn't matter whether or not the brain is the *only* hardware that can run the mind - even if the mind is running on some kind of "extended brain", or a silicon brain, or something, *mental events still have to have physical correlates*. And with current technology at least, those physical correlates are limited to being neural correlates.

Whether or not we can point to a specific neural or physical correlate for a given mental state isn't the issue here. The issue is: what would be the implications of accepting mental phenomena *as distinct from or preceding physical phenomena* into our theories? I can't imagine that would be good for physics (which is why so many people who believe in these things either reject science altogether, or claim to have discovered something that scientists are "only now beginning to prove").

So the reason why I don't believe in free-floating mental states is that my conception of the universe *simply doesn't leave room for them*. Is this closed-minded (as many "open-minded" people contend)? Of course! I pretty much dismiss all ideas of non-physical stuff, including mental stuff, out of hand, because I think of it as a variable I've eliminated from my equations. But I will quite happily talk of mental stuff, and suspend disbelief in it, and give in to the illusion that it exists, because there's simply no other way yet, maybe ever, to talk about what goes on in my mind.