---
title: 'Protests, Pile-Ons and Pushback'
---

In my last post _(edit: deleted because I didn't like it)_, I mentioned how protests often seem to be more about protesters engaging with and talking to other protesters and less about changing the opinions of unconvinced or hostile people. I think this is partially true: protests are for the benefit of a wider public, about getting attention and making people aware that something protest-worthy is going on, but what actually happens at protests is for the benefit of the protesters.

My own motivations for attending protests have generally been feelings of anger, sadness and isolation at some hateful or criminal act in which I see systemic failure or malevolence. I didn't really expect to change anything by going there. I just wanted to be among people who felt as strongly about what had happened as I did. <!--more--> I wanted to feel like someone was standing up to challenge the people who had allowed it to happen. Like they couldn't just *do this* and get away with it.

I didn't know anything about how to achieve social change, or what exactly needed to be protested against, or who needed to do what for this to not happen again. I just knew I wasn't okay with what had happened. I had to say or do something. And the only action available to me seemed to be attending a protest against it.

I hoped that at the protests I would meet people who had been fighting these things and agitating for these changes longer than I had, who could tell me what needed to be done. Whenever I went, however, I was left confused and rather disappointed. It all felt too symbolic and choir-preachy to me. The speech-makers seemed to be saying what they were saying because that was what they were supposed to say, not because they believed it, like priests conducting some esoteric ritual. The chants were confusing and I didn't know the words and it felt like a game of Antakshari where I couldn't sing along. I was also unsure what the point was of standing in a group and shouting the slogans to each other - weren't we supposed to shout them at someone else? How was the protest supposed to work if we just went off by ourselves in a corner to protest?

After those early protests (mostly at Jantar Mantar, organized and led by people I didn't know), I attended larger protests that dealt with issues that more immediately affected me. I saw cycles of protests and counter-protests and ideological wars being fought through these gatherings and the subsequent media coverage. The protests started to seem a little like campaign rallies - a show of strength - our numbers are greater than yours, our voices are louder.

I think protests have many different functions and people have many different reasons for attending them. But these are probably the most general ones: feeling like something has happened that cannot go unchallenged, wanting a sense of solidarity and community with others who feel the same way, and sending out a message to whoever's watching that there are large numbers of people who won't stand for this. In that moment, you're not really thinking about how to solve the problem. You're just thinking about pushing back.

I also think that in this, protests have a lot in common with social media pile-ons. When someone says something on Facebook or Twitter that incenses you, you're not really thinking about how to get them to change their view. You're thinking *how dare they say that, this can't go unchallenged*. Social media mobs form out of people who see a post for which they probably weren't the intended audience - and who then feel angry and attacked and want to *do something*. It wasn't said *to* them, but it was said *in their presence*, in what feels like a public space. So they need to challenge it in  large numbers in order to reclaim that space for themselves.

(This is why I hate social media. It's basically the entire world knit together into a giant group chat. I can't think of any way this could end well.)

But social media pile-ons are hardly a model of dissent or confrontation we ought to aspire to. They don't have much space for nuance, or constructive debate, or conflict resolution. They're an attempt to alter a social reality by the sheer force of pushback. If it's true that protests have some of the same motivations and dynamics going on, then maybe we shouldn't be surprised that they're not as effective as we want them to be.

Protest-as-assertion is important, but not necessarily in harmony with protest-as-community, protest-as-show-of-strength, protest-as-demand-for-negotiation ("hamari maange poori karo"), protest-as-awareness-raiser or protest-as-attempt-to-change-public-opinion (and I haven't even gotten to protest-as-cool-rebellious-act-you-can-post-photos-of-on-social-media). A protest that's very effective at being one of these things can be very ineffective at being others.

At one of the early protests I attended against the lynching of Akhlaq, I remember there was an old man who ran into the crowd, very upset at hearing slogans against the RSS. He wanted to know why the protesters were against the RSS when all it wanted to do was unite Hindus. I wondered at the time, although I had no reason to think this, whether his distress came from caste oppression, whether perhaps he thought the RSS was good because it united Hindus in a single group regardless of caste. If so, his question deserved deeper engagement from the protesters than what it eventually got (I think they just took him aside and tried to calm him down).

At another protest, another time, against curfew timings for female students in hostels and PGs, a young Brahmin man (bodi and all) came up on the stage to respectfully ask the protesters to justify their positions because he did not quite understand them. He wanted to know why the women were asking for freedom from their own families and from the police, when those were the very people who kept them safe. The speakers did try to answer his questions as well as they could, but there was too much yelling from the excited crowd for there to be any sort of sustained dialogue. I went home wishing that I could have found him afterward and talked to him.

Many people, when they see protests happening, don't immediately know what to think. They have doubts and questions and are skeptical for different reasons. They want to know what the slogans and placards mean and why the protesters want what they want. If their questions are not answered, they may become annoyed and unsympathetic to the protests and unlikely to want to learn more about the cause. Still others, even among the protesters, may be broadly sympathetic but unconvinced by the symbolism or by particular aspects of the demands. When different groups come together to protest, as they often do, even organizers and leaders of the protest may not agree with other organizers and leaders about what the protest ought to be.

This is why I think protests ought to have some kind of helpdesk or a few people standing off to the side to have debates and conversations and answer questions. The only conversations I've seen happening are either between friends who've met up at the protest, or random people talking to the media. I guess it is technically possible to go there and try talking to individual protesters who aren't busy sloganeering, but many of them might be equally confused themselves, or unwilling to talk, or not the best representatives of the protest. That wouldn't be a problem if there were some people who were designated for that - people you could point to if someone asked "who do I talk to around here?"

Till then, I guess I'll have to content myself with places other than protest venues for real engagement and conversation.