---
title: Morality as a Scarce Resource
---

[spoilers: *The Good Place*]

<!--more-->

In season 3 of *The Good Place*, there's [a character named Doug Forcett](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HPEwD7WpI9g) who, having figured out the afterlife's points system while tripping on mushrooms, dedicates himself completely to living the most ethical life possible, so that when he dies he'll have enough points to go to the good place. He tries to live completely sustainably, is pleasant to everyone he meets, donates as much as he can to whoever needs it, and generally takes every action possible that might earn him points and avoids anything that might lose him points. However, when the points system is investigated, it turns out that even Doug Forcett doesn't have enough points to get into the good place - that in fact, for hundreds of years, not a single person has managed to get in, because the way the system is set up makes it impossible. The modern world is so complex that a person simply cannot keep track of all the unintended consequences of their actions, which leaves them with no way to make ethical decisions.

The idea behind this narrative arc is something that most people have probably struggled with, in one form or another. We know that the world is full of evil and suffering, yet we go about our lives every day attending to far more frivolous matters than fighting that evil or alleviating that suffering. As Adam Smith [wrote in 1749](https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/7267664-let-us-suppose-that-the-great-empire-of-china-with),

> If [a man] was to lose his little finger to-morrow, he would not sleep to-night; but, provided he never saw them, he will snore with the most profound security over the ruin of a hundred millions of his brethren, and the destruction of that immense multitude seems plainly an object less interesting to him, than this paltry misfortune of his own. 

Does this, then, mean that we are all necessarily immoral? If we know that war and hunger and disease afflict large portions of humanity, that there are people living under terrible injustice and oppression, but we choose to do nothing about it, to not even worry about it, then doesn't that seem like a fundamental failure of morality, empathy, humanism and all those noble sentiments we like to rhapsodize about when we talk of what sets us apart from the birds and the beasts? Is ethical behaviour impossible?

It sometimes seems to me like that's how many people, especially on the radical left, resolve this paradox: [there's no ethical consumption under capitalism](https://www.marxist.ca/article/why-there-is-no-ethical-consumption-under-capitalism). Or more generally, no ethical action possible under any systems of oppression. It's impossible for men to not be sexist, or for white people to not be racist, so long as patriarchy and white supremacy still exist. But ascribing the impossibility of ethics to the system does leave one possible ethical action - destroying the system and replacing it with another that allows for ethical action. 

What if, however, no such system is possible? In other words - what if it's not the fault of capitalism or patriarchy or white supremacy or any other system that we act less-than-ethically, but simply the human condition? Adam Smith's observation, which few of us can honestly deny, does seem to suggest that this is the case - we simply can't bring ourselves to care about injustice and harm that's done to people (or other sentient beings) not connected with us in any way. Our own pain and indignation carries more weight with us than anyone else's, though there's no objective reason why it should.

There are, to be sure, cases where this is not entirely true. Often, the suffering of the people we love or feel bound to protect is of far greater concern to us than our own. We are also capable of caring deeply about people we have never met and will never meet, and even those who never existed, like fictional characters. Yet this concern is, at best, uneven. We are still likely to care more about our own family and friends than about strangers, to feel more outraged at the suffering of our own people than that of others, and to be more affected by the anguish of one person whose story we have heard than by the hardships of thousands whose stories we don't have time to listen to. And this unevenness can, in itself, be a kind of unfairness.

Effective altruism is one of the few philosophies that does recognize this problem (as described so far; the opening scene of the Doug Forcett episode even shows him reading a book by Peter Singer). The idea is that you try to give whatever you feel you reasonably can without compromising your own well-being, and to send it wherever it will do the most good. This seems (to me) like the closest thing we can have to a solution - but that very fact reveals a lot about the nature of the problem.

Morality is hard work. I don't mean in the sense that it's a moral virtue to be hardworking or in the sense that you have to work hard on your character to develop moral virtue. I mean it literally takes *work* to establish and maintain moral order in the world. Just like you have to work to establish order in your daily life, to clean up your room (not to go all Jordan Peterson here) and maintain a routine and stay healthy, you have to work to establish moral order too, to take care of the people around you, to help those who need it, to fight injustice. It can *seem* like it's the other way round, that if you just don't do anything terrible for your health or don't intentionally mess up your room, it'll stay that way, and it's the creation of disorder that requires action. But it doesn't quite work like that. You get struck by illnesses and accidents you couldn't have done anything to prevent, and you spill hot drinks on the carpet while the dust and cobwebs accumulate, and ignorance and misunderstandings and petty quarrels wear down the strongest bonds of love and duty. You have to work even to keep things bearable.

For this reason, I think the idea of morality as a *quality* that can be ascribed to actions or people is mistaken. This view constructs ethics by analogy with logic - just as a logical proposition can be true or false, a moral action can be right or wrong, and just as a logical argument can be valid or invalid, so can a moral argument. Just as a person who makes valid logical arguments (and in consequence generally accepts true propositions and rejects false ones) can be said to be a logical person, a person who makes valid moral arguments (and in consequence generally performs right actions and avoids wrong ones) can be said to be a moral person.

But it's probably more helpful to think of morality as a *capacity*, and make an analogy with creativity. Moral action is like art - it's action that has some underlying ethical principles, just as art has some underlying aesthetic principles. However, you need time and money and effort to make art, and nobody expects you to make *all* the art in the world, no matter how great an artist you are. Yet we frequently have this expectation of morality - that we must be either *completely* moral, care about every cause, help every suffering being, or else the whole concept of morality is a sham and we might as well give up on it.

And it can often seem that way, especially from the point of view of someone in pain and in need of help. Acute suffering can make the universe - and all its inhabitants - appear monstrously indifferent, going about its business like nothing's wrong and expecting you to behave the same way. No matter what the cause of our pain, we end up blaming those who walk past us without acknowledging it, who come into our lives and then return to their own without making the slightest effort to make it any easier on us. What would it cost them? - nothing, practically *nothing* - to be a little kinder, a little more thoughtful - and how much it would mean to us - and yet they won't. They must hate us then, they must approve of our suffering, and they deserve to be blamed for it.

This is how, in practice, our moral judgments often end up working. And I think the impulse to take on a godlike, metaphysical moral responsibility, where we believe ourselves to be guilty of "complicity" in every wrong we don't actively try to right, can be a response to this kind of judgment - whether it comes from someone else or from us, and whether we see ourselves as the person suffering or the person with the power to alleviate another's suffering.

As moral as we think this view is, however, it closely resembles the cynical view often promoted by contemporary anti-liberal, anti-humanist propagandists - if someone's attempts to engage in moral action are open to the charge of "selectivity" (as they always are), then their morality isn't moral at all, and the only possible morality is an unapologetically, defiantly "selective" and exclusionary one, that even lays greater claim to legitimacy by "correcting" or "balancing" the original "selective" morality. The argument presumably makes some sense if morality is like logic, but not if it's like creativity - because you can't criticize art for not being the "perfect" example of art, since there's no such thing. Different people engaging in different kinds of moral action are simply trying to bring moral order to different parts of the world, with whatever resources they have, and focusing on one goal does not (necessarily) mean denying the importance of the others.

The idea of moral action as a scarce resource - as something we can't have in unlimited quantities just by willing it - means that there will always be more wrongs than we can direct our moral resources toward righting, and some of them will be left out. This raises the question of allocation - you can agree that something is wrong, but still not make an effort to right it, because there's only so much you can do. And we generally (for evolutionary reasons, but I won't discuss that now) tend to allocate our moral resources toward establishing moral order in our immediate vicinity, in our own communities and among the people we know, among those to whom we feel some kind of proximity.

Why do we do this, and what would happen if we didn't?

In his quest to maximize his afterlife points and gain entry into the good place, Doug Forcett ends up turning into a neurotic, guilt-ridden doormat, allowing himself to be bullied and taken advantage of, donating more than his health allows, treating every slip-up in polite conversation as a terrible moral failure, berating himself and lashing out at anyone who tries to make him feel better. Obsessed with being altruistic in pursuit of the ultimate selfish goal, he leads such a miserable life that it's almost painful just to watch him. If nothing else, this at least fails the test of the Kantian categorical imperative - you can't possibly will this to be a universal law without falling into contradiction.

So perhaps a practical view of ethics requires accepting its limitations, acknowledging the existence of moral dilemmas, and not trying to fill the void left by God in the modern world, for then we'll just be arguing over theodicy, or anthrodicy, till the end of time. Hoping one day we'll be able to distinguish between good and evil, selfishness and altruism, [light and dark](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Checker_shadow_illusion), duck and rabbit.