---
title: Infallibility
---

In [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3nApJb5gEy8), ex-Scientologist Chris Shelton talks about how Scientology constructs itself as infallible. Not only does it insist it's the *only* possible solution to all problems, it's also the *perfect* solution that "produces results 100% of the time on 100% of the people to whom it is applied".<!--more-->

> [Hubbard] takes great pains in a number of places to stress how Scientology cannot fail to work on anyone.

But if it can't fail, then what do you do in the event that someone tries it out and doesn't get results? Surely that happens to at least some of the people some of the time, or the planet would have long ago been cleared and Scientology would have achieved its goals. According to Shelton, it was to deal with precisely this problem that Hubbard created the concept of the Suppressive Person.

> Hubbard actually did realize that it wasn't always going to work on everyone. So he came up with a solution to explain its failures, while still claiming 100% workability. What I'm talking about is the justification behind all of the dirty tricks and brutally unfair treatment that Scientology dishes out to those it no longer favours or who dare to speak out against it... Rather than admit that Scientology might not be for everyone, or that some people are just not going to respond to his brand of psychotherapy, instead he came up with a new concept: a Scientology bad guy who would be the perfect explanation for every failure. He invented the "Suppressive Person".

I discussed [earlier]({{site.baseurl}}{%post_url 2020-12-22-us-vs-them %}) how the Suppressive Person is the enemy marked by an inability to cooperate (with Scientology) and how this serves as an excuse to demonize dissent. But cult logic is an intricately designed system that simultaneously serves many more purposes than can be identified in one discussion. The Suppressive Person is not (only) someone who criticizes, dissents from or renounces Scientology - but also someone for whom Scientology *fails to give results*.

The distinction between criticism and acknowledging imperfection is crucial. Ordinarily, when we put time, effort or money into something, we expect it to work reasonably well and frequently enough to justify the investment, but no more than that. If it doesn't work *perfectly* and *all the time*, we don't consider that a flaw. We may think of it as good or even optimal without thinking of it as perfect or ideal. 

But this distinction is dissolved in cult logic, where to observe that the cult doctrine is not the One True Panacea is to be a critic or dissenter, and to be a critic or dissenter is to be an existential enemy and a moral monster. This is clearly illustrated by Hubbard's view of Suppressive Persons. He claimed that SPs were "no-gain cases" whose innate hostility toward good things prevented them from benefiting from Scientology. In fact, the *only way* to tell whether someone was an SP was to ask whether they had benefited from Scientology auditing. If they hadn't, then they were an SP.

Convenient, to say the least.

The cult's promise of salvation and absolute perfection and the suppression of all criticism or dissent are two sides of the same coin. The taller the claims, the more easily they fall apart under scrutiny. The claim that the cult's philosophy improved many people's lives would be hard to challenge or disprove; the claim that it could cure all physical and mental illness would be obvious nonsense (to most people, at any rate). Thus the most absurd claims, being the most fragile, would have to be protected most carefully. To shatter them would not require criticism, or even dissent, but merely the ability to doubt.

On the other hand, once the cult was hermetically sealed off from criticism, there would no longer be any limit to how fantastical and absurd its claims could be. This would create a cycle of suppressing criticism and pushing the doctrine further and further away from reality. If the doctrine was criticized, that would necessitate suppression, and once the critics had been suppressed, it would clear the way to indoctrinate the remaining members further, which would in turn open up the doctrine to more criticism...

In other words: the cult that wants to claim that it is infallible has to *make* itself infallible. To say that *the cult can never be wrong* and that *no dissent from it is allowed* are not statements that follow from each other but different ways of stating the same reality. The logic isn't that the cult is never wrong and *therefore* you must not dissent. It isn't that nobody dissents from it and *therefore* the cult is always right. It's that the cult is never wrong *and that is the same as* no dissent from it being allowed. Dissent is not allowed because it's not possible, and not possible because it's not allowed. These aren't descriptive or normative statements but metaphysical ones.

The cult suppresses not only critics but also rivals and competitors. This is the other reason why absolute faith in every particular is demanded. It's not enough merely to believe in *some* interpretation of the doctrine - unless you believe in *exactly* the interpretation put forward by the cult, you aren't truly faithful. A rival could come up with a different interpretation and draw the followers away, and that would be as much of a threat to the cult as a critic dismantling the doctrine - so it has to be treated as just as immoral and diabolical. (Independent practitioners of Scientology are referred to as "squirrels" and [have allegedly been harassed and intimidated](https://www.esquire.com/entertainment/movies/news/a53331/the-most-insane-revelations-from-my-scientology-movie/).)

The other side of this is that the cult will try to outdo all possible rivals in the desirability of the salvation it offers. Even if it starts out claiming to solve only certain kinds of problems, it will eventually extend that to banishing all problems forever. The salvation offered has to both justify the price that will inevitably be demanded for it, and be more attractive than anything else on offer. The cult ends up selling the followers a vision of eternal bliss in paradise.

Infallibility, claims of absolute perfection, the suppression of dissent and the suppression of competition are all mutually supportive components of the strategy of cult indoctrination. I'll try and explore this strategy further in future posts, because all of this still only feels like the tip of the iceberg to me.