---
title: It's Always Your Fault
---

The infallibility of a leader, group or doctrine is always premised on the belief that if you have a problem, you are the problem.<!--more-->

Cult members often report that any time they express dissatisfaction with what they're told to do or think, it'll somehow be turned around and used as evidence that there's something wrong with them - because you see, if there *weren't* anything wrong with them, then they couldn't possibly have a problem with something so noble and idealistic and hallowed and true and right and correct as the cult.

...or, at any rate, even if they did have a problem (nothing's perfect, after all), they wouldn't focus on it or keep bringing it up when there were far more important things to focus on, such as the cult's mission to save the world from evil. Imagine quibbling about such petty things, when there were *real* problems out there to solve and *real* enemies to fight!

Those who couldn't let it go even when all of this was pointed out to them were clearly trying to sow division within the ranks of the only group that was truly opposed to evil. They were either covert enemy agents trying to bring the cult down from within, or had somehow been compromised by their connections with those outside the cult.

One of the most obvious signs of a cult is that those within it can't imagine how someone could be a good and reasonable person and still disagree with them. They're convinced that such a person has to be motivated either by evil or by stupidity, or both. Ironically, they believe of others what is true of them - that they've been indoctrinated into a rigid and intolerant belief system that allows for no nuance or critical thinking. A person insisting on their own judgment, values, freedom and autonomy is seen as intellectually, morally or spiritually flawed, since they cannot accept the higher wisdom of the cult or surrender to anything greater than themselves.

Having personal boundaries and refusing to accede to every demand is reframed as selfishness, egoism and narrow-mindedness, a lack of community spirit or an antisocial disposition. It's the oldest trick in the book: if you think this is unreasonable, you're being unreasonable. If you have a problem, you are the problem.

The reason why this charge works so well is that it's true. A person who chooses their own judgment and values over those of their community is being profoundly selfish and unreasonable. And that's as it should be. We aren't the perfectly cooperative and harmonious creatures of utopian fantasy, nor would our lives necessarily be better if we were. If conflict were not in our nature, then fairness would not be either. If we were unconditionally cooperative, then we'd cooperate even with those who took advantage of us. We wouldn't get angry at injustice, or ever think of overthrowing tyrants. The dispositions that cults want us to have are not only, as they claim, dispositions that would enable us to live in accord with each other, but also dispositions that would turn us into pliable subjects.

And we don't act on rational conclusions that we've derived from first principles either, and nor do we need to. Our motives and desires, at their core, have no justification other than that we just are that way. We care about safeguarding our lives, seek higher status within our communities, want to intervene when we see innocent people being harmed, try to accumulate resources that we can share with our friends and family, refuse to eat certain foods even though they're good for us, insist on wearing certain clothes even though we look ridiculous in them, laugh at jokes that may or may not be funny to others, and possess countless other quirks and inclinations that have no basis in reason at all. We don't do these things because we reason that they're objectively right or good, but simply because we instinctively know that this is how we want to live.

And certainly it's true that our instincts can lead us astray, but so can our reason. A good example is the [utility monster](https://www.smbc-comics.com/comic/2012-04-03), a thought experiment proposed by the philosopher Robert Nozick. Most people would accept that the utilitarian principle of the greatest happiness of the greatest number makes some sense as a moral maxim. A utility monster is a hypothetical entity that can exploit this principle by experiencing greater happiness (or utility) from the same resources than anyone else does, so that the moral thing to do is always to use all resources to benefit this entity. In more abstract terms, this is true of any principle or cause - if it can be shown to be the most important ethical consideration, then it's moral to direct all resources toward it regardless of the effect this has on anyone or anything else.

This is the trick that cults use to get people to ignore their misgivings about what's being demanded of them. Ethics is seen as an absolute commitment, not as a balance of competing interests and tradeoffs. No price is too great for the greatest possible good. And by a logical sleight of hand, this commitment is shown to be necessarily to the group or leader. As for those who resist or refuse this commitment, there is obviously something wrong with them if they cannot see that it is rational and moral to give all their resources to the utility monster.
